docs: RFC-0014 v1.0.0 — Path-finding (#80)
hoprnet/hopr-rfc: rfcs/RFC-0014-path-finding/0014-path-finding.md

# RFC-0014: Path-finding

- **RFC Number:** 0014

> - **Title:** Path-finding

Author: Not applying — the title uses sentence case (`Path-finding`) to match the `# RFC-0014: Path-finding` h1 on line 1. `structure-check.sh` validates that both values are consistent; changing only the metadata line would break CI. Other RFCs in this repo (e.g. RFC-0010 `Automatic path discovery`) use the same sentence-case convention.

- **Status:** Finalised

> - **Author(s):** @Teebor-Choka

Author: ```suggestion
- **Author(s):** Tibor Csóka (@Teebor-Choka)
```

Author: Applied.

- **Created:** 2026-06-05
- **Updated:** 2026-06-05

> - **Version:** v1.0.0 (Finalised)

Author: ```suggestion
- **Version:** v1.0.0
```

Author: Applied.

- **Supersedes:** none
- **Related Links:** [RFC-0002](../RFC-0002-mixnet-keywords/0002-mixnet-keywords.md),
  [RFC-0004](../RFC-0004-hopr-packet-protocol/0004-hopr-packet-protocol.md),
  [RFC-0005](../RFC-0005-proof-of-relay/0005-proof-of-relay.md),
  [RFC-0008](../RFC-0008-session-protocol/0008-session-protocol.md),
  [RFC-0009](../RFC-0009-session-start-protocol/0009-session-start-protocol.md),
  [RFC-0010](../RFC-0010-automatic-path-discovery/0010-automatic-path-discovery.md)

## 1. Abstract

> This RFC specifies the multi-hop path-finding mechanism for the HOPR protocol. Given a directed channel graph whose edges carry quality observations produced by the probing mechanism defined in [RFC-0010](../RFC-0010-automatic-path-discovery/0010-automatic-path-discovery.md), a path-finding node enumerates simple paths of a requested length, scores each candidate as the product of per-edge quality values, validates every candidate against on-chain channel state, and selects one path by weighted-random sampling. Accepted candidates are cached with periodic background refresh to amortise discovery cost. This specification documents the mechanism as implemented in the HOPR 4.0.x software release.

Author: ```suggestion
This RFC specifies the multi-hop path-finding mechanism for the HOPR protocol. Given a directed channel graph whose edges carry quality observations produced by the probing mechanism defined in [RFC-0010](../RFC-0010-automatic-path-discovery/0010-automatic-path-discovery.md), a path-finding node enumerates simple paths of a requested length, scores each candidate as the product of per-edge quality values, validates every candidate against on-chain channel state, and selects one path by weighted-random sampling. Accepted candidates are cached with periodic background refresh to amortise discovery cost.
```

Author: Applied.

2. **Reliability**: Paths that traverse low-quality or disconnected edges increase packet loss. Candidates with very low quality MUST be down-weighted or pruned so that the sender is unlikely to select them.

3. **Incentivisation**: Every hop except the last MUST be backed by an open payment channel, ensuring relay nodes receive economic compensation for forwarding.

These requirements motivate a quality-weighted random selection over a candidate pool of validated simple paths, as specified in §4.

## 3. Terminology

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [01] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

All terminology used in this document, including general mix network concepts and HOPR-specific definitions, is provided in [RFC-0002](../RFC-0002-mixnet-keywords/0002-mixnet-keywords.md). That document serves as the authoritative reference for the terminology and conventions adopted across the HOPR RFC series.

The following additional terms are defined for use within this document:

> **Channel graph**: The directed graph maintained by each node whose vertices are HOPR nodes (identified by their offchain public key) and whose directed edges represent viable payment-channel connections, each carrying quality observations as defined in [RFC-0010](../RFC-0010-automatic-path-discovery/0010-automatic-path-discovery.md) §4.2.

Author: ```suggestion
**Channel graph**: The directed graph maintained by each node whose vertices are HOPR nodes (identified by their offchain public key) and whose directed edges represent physical or logical connections, each carrying quality observations as defined in [RFC-0010](../RFC-0010-automatic-path-discovery/0010-automatic-path-discovery.md) §4.2.
```

Author: Applied.

**Edge score**: A real number in `[0, 1]` derived from the probe observations on a directed edge. An edge with a score of `0` is unusable for path selection; a score of `1` represents optimal quality. The formula is defined in §4.2.

> **Path-cost**: The multiplicative product of edge scores along a candidate path, in `(0, 1]`. A zero path-cost means the path is unusable.

Author: ```suggestion
**Path-value**: The multiplicative product of edge scores along a candidate path, in `(0, 1]`. A zero path-cost means the path is unusable.
```

Author: Applied.

**Forward path**: A path whose source node is the local node itself, used to carry messages toward a remote destination.

> **Return path**: A path whose source node is a remote destination, used to carry replies back to the local node via a SURB (see [RFC-0004](../RFC-0004-hopr-packet-protocol/0004-hopr-packet-protocol.md)).

Author: From 0002.

Author: Applied — Forward path and Return path definitions removed (they belong in RFC-0002).

**Candidate pool**: The set of simple paths of a requested length enumerated from the channel graph, each paired with its path-cost. Candidates with a zero or negative path-cost are discarded before further processing.

**Validated path**: A candidate path that has been confirmed against the on-chain channel resolver — every consecutive pair of nodes is backed by an open payment channel, and every node identity resolves correctly on-chain.

**Path planner**: The component that owns the cache of validated paths, drives the selector, and resolves incoming routing requests into a concrete `ValidatedPath`.

**Path selector**: The stateless component that performs graph traversal and returns a candidate pool for a given `(source, destination, hops)` query.

**Hop count** (`hops`): The number of intermediate relay nodes on a path (excluding source and destination). A path with `hops = 1` traverses a single relay between sender and receiver.

## 4. Specification

### 4.1 Network graph inputs

> Path-finding operates over the channel graph described in [RFC-0010](../RFC-0010-automatic-path-discovery/0010-automatic-path-discovery.md) §4.2. This section summarises the properties consumed by path-finding; the full graph construction and probing protocol are defined in RFC-0010 and are out of scope here.

Author: Fixed — both mentions of RFC-0010 in §4.1 now use the full relative path link.

Each directed edge `(u → v)` in the graph stores an observation record with up to two independent measurement streams:

- **Immediate observations** (from immediate-neighbour probes, RFC-0010 §4.2.1.1): round-trip latency samples and connectivity status for the direct `u → v` link.
- **Intermediate observations** (from loopback path probes, RFC-0010 §4.2.1.2): attributed latency for the `u → v` segment within a longer path, plus on-chain channel capacity.

> Each measurement stream maintains an exponential moving average (EMA) of observed latency (window depth `N = 3`) and an EMA of probe success rate (window depth `N = 5`). These EMAs are updated by the probing mechanism and read by path-finding.

Author: ```suggestion
Each measurement stream maintains an exponential moving average (EMA) of observed latency (window depth `N >= 3`) and an EMA of probe success rate (window depth `N >= 5`). These EMAs MAY be configurable.
```

Author: Applied.

### 4.2 Edge score

The edge score for a directed edge `(u → v)` is derived from the probe observation record as follows.

**Link score** — for each measurement stream (immediate or intermediate), the link score is:

```
link_score = probe_success_rate × latency_score(avg_latency)

> ```

Author: Fixed — all formula code blocks are now tagged as `text`.

where `latency_score` is a step function:

| Average latency | Latency score |
|---|---|
| ≤ 75 ms | 1.00 |
| 76 – 125 ms | 0.70 |
| 126 – 200 ms | 0.30 |
| > 200 ms | 0.15 |
| no data | 0.05 |

**Combined edge score** — the edge score combines the two measurement streams:

```
edge_score =
  (imm_score + inter_score) / 2   if both streams are present
  inter_score                      if only intermediate is present
  imm_score                        if only immediate is present
  0                                if neither stream is present
```

An edge with no observations at all has a score of `0` and MUST be treated as unusable.

> ### 4.3 Path-cost function

Author: ```suggestion
### 4.3 Path-value function
```

Author: Applied.

> Path-finding uses three variants of an edge-cost function, supplied as an opaque parameter to the graph traversal algorithm. Each variant enforces a set of edge admission criteria and computes a per-edge cost in `(0, 1]` for admissible edges, or a non-positive sentinel for inadmissible ones. The traversal algorithm prunes any path containing a non-positive edge cost.

Author: ```suggestion
Path-finding uses three variants of an edge value function, supplied as an opaque parameter to the graph traversal algorithm. Each variant enforces a set of edge admission criteria and computes a per-edge cost in `(0, 1]` for admissible edges, or a non-positive sentinel for inadmissible ones. The traversal algorithm prunes any path containing a non-positive edge cost.
```

Author: Applied.

**`forward_without_self_loopback(edge_penalty, min_ack_rate)`** — used in Phase-2 extended forward search (§4.4.1). Applied to every edge except the appended final hop.

**`returning(length, edge_penalty, min_ack_rate)`** — used for return paths (`source ≠ local node`). Applied to every edge in the path.

The admission and cost rules applied by all variants are:

1. **Last-edge connectivity**: the last edge on the path MUST satisfy `is_connected = true`. An edge that is not physically connected receives a non-positive cost and is pruned.

2. **Intermediate-edge capacity**: every edge that is not the last MUST have a positive on-chain channel capacity. An edge with zero or absent capacity is pruned.

3. **Minimum acknowledgement rate**: an edge whose immediate-probe acknowledgement rate is below `min_ack_rate` (default `0.1`) receives a non-positive cost and is pruned.

4. **Unprobed-edge penalty**: an edge that lacks probe observations is assigned a cost of `edge_penalty` (default `0.5`) rather than `0`. This allows unprobed edges to be selected but makes them less likely than well-observed edges.

> 5. **Path-cost accumulation**: the path-cost is the product of all per-edge costs along the path:

Author: ```suggestion
5. **Path value accumulation**: the path value is the product of all per-edge costs along the path:
```

Author: Applied.

### 4.9 Worked example

Consider a node `A` seeking a 1-hop forward path to destination `D` through a diamond topology:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A -->|0.9| R1
    A -->|0.6| R2
    R1 -->|0.8| D
    R2 -->|0.7| D
```

_Fig. 2: Diamond topology with per-edge costs (example values)_

Phase 1 discovers two candidates:

| Path | Edge costs | Path-cost |
|---|---|---|
| A → R1 → D | 0.9 × 0.8 | **0.72** |
| A → R2 → D | 0.6 × 0.7 | **0.42** |

Both validate. The `WeightedCollection` stores them with total weight `W = 0.72 + 0.42 = 1.14`. A uniform draw `r ∈ [0, 1.14)`:

- `r < 0.72` → path `A → R1 → D` selected (probability ≈ 63 %)
- `0.72 ≤ r < 1.14` → path `A → R2 → D` selected (probability ≈ 37 %)

The lower-cost path via R2 is still selected with significant probability, ensuring relay diversity.

## 5. Design considerations

> **Multiplicative path-cost composition**: path-cost is the product of edge costs rather than their sum or minimum. This ensures that one very low-quality edge can substantially reduce the probability of a path being selected, without completely preventing selection — a property useful for graceful degradation when part of the network is degraded but still usable.

Author: ```suggestion
**Multiplicative path value composition**: path-cost is the product of edge costs rather than their sum or minimum. This ensures that one very low-quality edge can substantially reduce the probability of a path being selected, without completely preventing selection — a property useful for graceful degradation when part of the network is degraded but still usable.
```

Author: Applied.

**Cache bypass for zero-hop and explicit paths**: zero-hop direct messages and caller-supplied intermediate paths are not suitable for caching. Zero-hop paths depend only on key resolution, which is lightweight. Explicit paths are caller-controlled and may not be reusable across invocations.

## 6. Compatibility

Path-finding is a purely local mechanism; it reads the channel graph and the on-chain channel state but does not modify either. No wire-protocol changes are introduced by this specification.

The configuration parameters (`max_cache_capacity`, `cache_ttl`, `refresh_period`, `max_cached_paths`, `edge_penalty`, `min_ack_rate`) MAY be tuned per deployment without affecting protocol correctness or interoperability. Changes to these parameters affect only performance and selection probabilities.

The `EdgeValueFn` interface abstracts the cost function used during graph traversal. Deployments MAY substitute alternative cost functions (see §9) without changing the candidate generation or weighted-selection mechanisms, provided the substituted function satisfies the admissibility contract in §4.3.

## 7. Security considerations

> **Path manipulation by adversarial relay nodes**: a malicious relay node may report artificially favourable probe results, inflating its edge score and increasing the probability of being selected. The primary mitigation is the probing mechanism defined in [RFC-0010](../RFC-0010-automatic-path-discovery/0010-automatic-path-discovery.md) §7, which requires that observations be derived from direct network measurements rather than self-reports. Path selection in this RFC is downstream of that mitigation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: Applied — removed from §7.

**Deanonymisation via deterministic selection**: if the path selector were deterministic (always returning the highest-cost path), a passive adversary observing two flows with the same cost-optimal path could link them to the same sender. Weighted-random selection (§4.5) ensures that flows across the same source–destination pair will, over time, use different relay sets, reducing this linkage.

> **Cache poisoning**: a compromised or faulty validator could insert a `ValidatedPath` referencing a non-existent or closed channel. The cache TTL (default 60 s) bounds the lifetime of any such entry. Background refresh re-validates cached entries on every sweep, and on-chain validation at cache-miss time provides an authoritative check.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: Applied — removed from §7.

**Resource exhaustion**: the DFS enumeration is bounded by `max_paths` and the hop limit (`MAX_INTERMEDIATE_HOPS = 3`). The cache is bounded by `max_cache_capacity`. Together these prevent a malicious or misbehaving caller from exhausting memory or CPU through path-finding requests.

> **Last-hop omission of payment channel**: the last edge `(relay → destination)` is not required to have an open payment channel (§4.6). This is by design (see RFC-0010 §4.2) but means the last relay receives no payment for the final delivery hop. A relay SHOULD be aware that serving as a last-hop intermediary is uncompensated.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: Applied — removed from §7.

**Staleness window**: a freshly broken channel may be selected during the window between the last cache refresh and TTL expiry (at most `cache_ttl + refresh_period ≈ 90 s` in the default configuration). Applications that require immediate response to topology changes must accept either higher cache churn or a lower TTL.

**No stake or capacity weighting**: the current implementation weights paths purely by their quality score derived from probe latency and success rate. Channel balance or stake is not a factor in path-cost. This means a low-capacity but well-probed edge may score identically to a high-capacity one, potentially causing ticket failures if a channel becomes underfunded.

**No path diversity constraint**: the candidate pool may contain paths that share relay nodes (e.g. two paths both traversing node R). Repeated selection from such a pool could concentrate traffic on shared nodes, reducing anonymity over time. There is currently no minimum-diversity constraint on the pool.

## 9. Alternatives

> **Yen's K-shortest-paths algorithm**: Yen's algorithm produces the K cheapest simple paths between two nodes in polynomial time per path, using a Dijkstra-based auxiliary graph. For graphs with tens of thousands of nodes and sparse channel topologies, Yen's may outperform DFS at large hop counts. It was not adopted in 4.0.x because the hop bound of 3 makes the DFS tractable, and Yen's requires maintenance of heap-based auxiliary structures that add implementation complexity.

Author: Current network size and edge count makes the existing solution tractable, but we may be looking for alternatives in future.

Author: Agreed — moved to §11 Future Work as the "Yen's K-shortest-paths" item. Tracked in hoprnet/hoprnet#8169.

> **Bayesian edge scoring**: rather than an EMA of latency and success rate, a Bayesian model would maintain a posterior distribution over edge reliability given observed outcomes. This would provide confidence intervals and better handling of cold-start (new edges with few observations). It was not adopted because the EMA approach is simpler to implement and reason about, and the probe-based bootstrapping from RFC-0010 provides sufficient observation density in practice.

Author: This is future work.

Author: Moved to §11 Future Work (reactive path repair item). Tracked in hoprnet/hoprnet#8171.

**Stake-aware path weighting**: adding channel balance or node stake to the path-cost function would reduce the probability of selecting underfunded channels, decreasing ticket failure rates. This was considered but deferred because it introduces a dependency on the settlement layer (which may be observed with latency) and requires careful normalisation to avoid suppressing otherwise good-quality low-capacity edges. See §11 for future work.

**Anonymity-set constrained selection**: a selection constraint that enforces a minimum number of distinct relay nodes across the active path pool (Dingledine et al. [02]) would limit re-identification risk from repeated selections. This was not adopted because it requires tracking path history across requests and introduces stateful selection policy, adding complexity without a clear threat model for 4.0.x.

> **Reactive path repair**: on relay failure (detected mid-session from a missing acknowledgement), the planner could trigger an immediate cache eviction and re-selection. The current design relies on the background refresh and TTL expiry, which may leave a stale path in use for up to 90 s. Reactive repair was deferred due to the complexity of correlating relay failures (which surface as transport errors in upper layers) with specific cache keys.

Author: This is super compllicated... future work.

Author: Moved to §11 Future Work as the "Bayesian edge scoring" item. Tracked in hoprnet/hoprnet#8170.

## 10. Unresolved questions

> - What is the optimal cost-function composition for paths longer than 3 intermediate hops, should the hop bound ever be raised? The current multiplicative formula may over-penalise long paths through medium-quality edges.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: Applied — §10 now reads "None at this time."

> - Should path-selection telemetry (e.g., a histogram of chosen path-costs over time) be exported as an observable metric? Such a metric would aid in tuning `edge_penalty` and `min_ack_rate` but also reveals routing patterns to the node operator.

Author: ```suggestion
- Should path-selection telemetry (e.g., a histogram of chosen path-costs over time) be exported as an observable metric? Such a metric would aid in tuning `edge_penalty` and `min_ack_rate`.
```

Author: Future work.

Author: Moved to §11 Future Work. Tracked in hoprnet/hoprnet#8172.
